Abstract for European R conference:
https://2020.erum.io/

We want to present a regular talk:

Regular talk (20 minutes): abstracts accepted for regular talks will take place during oral sessions. Each talk is allowed 20 minutes for the presentation (including questions and answers).

Under the following track:
R Applications: Applications of R in fields such as social goods, finance, marketing, transportation, and many more. 


Abstract:

In 2019 various Latin-American countries faced protests and strikes showing dissatisfaction with corruption, low education investments, and economic inequality. At the end of November 2019 Colombia, faced a very intense week of protests where many types of events occurred: large scale manifestations, cacerolazos (demonstrations where saucepans are banged as a sign of protest), confrontations with anti-riot police, and a spread of fake news around violence and threads in Bogota and Cali. Some of these events originated in social media, but almost all of them were saw a reflection there.  To understand these events and relevant agents (politicians, media, journalists, artists, etc.), we pulled data from Twitter’s API using the rtweet R package and extracted around one million tweets ranging between the 20th to the 24th of November 2019 associated with the protest (via relevant keywords and hahstags). In this talk we will present an analysis of this data focusing in the following aspects: 

  - Network analysis of agents via retweets and engagement networks. 
  - Text analysis and topic development during the strike. 

In addition, we will explore a subset of this data using a relational event model. A relational event sequence is an order- or time-stamped series of observations indicating when an actor carried out a specific action, or interacted with another actor. The occurrence of events is modelled using standard survival analysis techniques but where the past relational history is considered when defining the probability of an specific event happening in the future. In the context of the Colombian protests, we look to understand whether topics were mentioned and discussed following a particular influence pattern, or if they organically came to be part of the conversation. We use permutation inference in relational event models to understand the probability of occurrence of certain patterns of conversation. 

Authors: 
- Sebastian Martinez, PhD candidate School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Glasgow. 
- Dr. Juan Orduz, Mathematician & Data Scientist. 